256 tech report 2 (#301)
datasciencecampus/pyGrams: docs/tech-report.md

    compute device: 		    15.162878787878798
    virtual machine: 		    14.348484848484855
    optical fiber: 			    13.814393939393954
    light source: 			    13.696969696969699
    client device: 			    10.465909090909093
    image form apparatus: 	            10.462121212121222
    display unit: 			    10.272727272727273
    unit configure: 		    10.151515151515154
    user device: 			    9.503787878787884
    display panel: 			    9.223484848484851
    user interface: 		    8.833333333333329
    touch panel: 			    7.844696969696972
    control unit: 			    7.818181818181827
    far configure: 			    7.393939393939394
    computer storage medium: 	    7.234848484848488
    mobile terminal: 		    6.91287878787879
    controller configure: 	            6.560606060606065
    frequency band: 		    6.3212121212121115

The main concern with this method is that not every time series pattern matches a quadratic or a sigmoid curve, in particular time series with multiple curves and stationary points. For this reason we are experimenting with other more flexible approaches like the [state-space model](#state-space-models) and [b-splines](#b-splines).

#### Which method is best?

> It all depends on what outcome is desirable. If we wish for a fast output elastically weighted towards the three last periods, considering also the global trend then Porter is best. If we are after a relatively fast output looking at emergence patterns matching a quadratic curve, anywhere in the time series, then quadratic fitting is the best solution. If accuracy and flexibility on the emergence period range is desired, then the state-space model with the Kalman filter, is the best option. pyGrams offers all the above options.

Reviewer: by the way - do we make state space available? We say we do, but we've not advertised it or written that part up, so need to be careful there until its ready.

...just noticed it is covered under the "Ongoing and Future work" section - can we hyperlink down to it?

### Timeseries Forecasting
The popular terms are processed to generate emergence scores, and then labelled as emerging (document counts increasing over time), stationary (document counts are static) or declining (document counts are reduced over time).

Given the labels, we take the top 25 emergent, top 25 stationary and top 25 declining terms and run usage predictions on these terms. The top emergent terms are defined as those with the most positive emergence score, the top stationary terms those with a score around 0, and top declining those with the most negative score.

Different prediction techniques were implemented and tested, to determine the most suitable approach to predict future trends. These techniques are now covered in the following sub-sections.

#### Naive, linear, quadratic, cubic
A naive predictor used the last value in each time series as the predicted value for all future time instances. Linear, quadratic, or cubic predictors utilised linear, quadratic, or cubic functions fitted to each time series to extrapolate future predicted values using those fitted parameters.

#### ARIMA<a href="#ref3">[3]</a>

> ARIMA (autoregressive integrated moving average) was applied using a grid search optimisation of its (p, d, q) parameters for each time series, based on training on the earliest 80% of the data and testing on the remaining 20% of data.  The grid search parameters were: p = [0, 1, 2, 4, 6], d = [0, 1, 2], q = [0, 1, 2].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ARIMA (Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average) was applied using a grid search optimisation of its (p, d, q) parameters for each time series, based on training on the earliest 80% of the data and testing on the remaining 20% of data.  The grid search parameters were: p = [0, 1, 2, 4, 6], d = [0, 1, 2], q = [0, 1, 2].
```

#### Holt-Winters<a href="#ref4">[4]</a>

Holt-Winters was applied in its damped exponential smoothing form using an automated option for parameter optimisation for each time series. Holt-Winters' parameters include: alpha (smoothing level), beta (smoothing slope), and phi (damping slope).

#### LSTM <a href="#ref5">[5]</a>

Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) recurrent neural networks are a powerful tool for detecting patterns in time series; for predicting *n* values, three potential approaches are:

1. Single LSTM that can predict 1 value ahead (but is called *n* times on its own prediction to generate *n* values ahead)
2. Single LSTM that can predict *n* values ahead

> 3. *n* LSTM models, each model predicts different steps ahead (so merge all results to produce *n* values ahead)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. *n* LSTM models, each model predicts a different single step ahead (so merging all results produces *n* values ahead)
```

The single LSTM with single lookahead can fail due to compound errors - once it goes wrong, its further predictions are then based on erroneous output. A single LSTM predicting *n* outputs at once will have a single prediction pass and in theory be less prone to compound error. Finally, multiple LSTMs each predicting a different step cannot suffer from compound error as they are independent of each other.

In addition, we use Keras as our neural network library, where LSTMs can be trained as either stateless or stateful. This means that when Keras trains the network, with a stateless LSTM, the LSTM state will not propagate between batches. Conversely, with a stateful LSTM the state will propagate between batches.

#### Prediction Testing - Results and Discussion
pyGrams can be run in a testing mode, where the last *n* values are retained and not presented to the forecasting algorithm - they are used to test its prediction. The residuals of the predictions are recorded and analysed; these results are output as an HTML report. For example, using the supplied USPTO dataset:

> ```python pygrams.py -it USPTO-mdf-0.05 -emt --test -pns 0```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python pygrams.py -it USPTO-mdf-0.05 -ts --test -pns 0```
```

The RMSE results are reported in summary form as above for relative RMSE, absolute error and average RMSE (the different metrics are reported to assist the user with realising that some errors may be relatively large but if they are based on very low frequencies, they are less of a concern - absolute error will show this; similarly a low relative error may actually be a large absolute error with high frequency counts, so we inform the user of both so they can investigate). The summary tables are then followed with the breakdown of results against each tested term (by default, 25 terms are tested in each of emergent, stationary and declining). An example test output is shown below for two emergent terms:

![img](img/prediction_emerging_test.png)

After examining the output, the predictors for five time periods ahead with lowest trimmed mean and standard deviation of relative root mean square error (of predicted vs actual) were found to be: naive, ARIMA, Holt-Winters, stateful single LSTM with single look-ahead and stateful multiple LSTMs with single look-ahead.

As a comparison, we also ran a predictor for ten time periods ahead:

> ```python pygrams.py -it USPTO-mdf-0.05 -emt --test -pns 0 -stp 10```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python pygrams.py -it USPTO-mdf-0.05 -ts --test -pns 0 -stp 10```
```

| | | | | | | | **stateful** | **stateless** | **stateful** | **stateless** | **stateful** | **stateless** |
| Trimmed (10% cut) mean of Relative RMSE | 16.6% | 19.9% | 30.2% | 24.1% | N/A | 11.6% | 20.1% | 31.2% | 13.5% | 23.2% | 15.1% | 32.0% |
| Standard deviation of Relative RMSE | 8.9% | 9.7% | 12.5% | 15.7% | 6.5% | 9.7% | 63.8% | 40.8% | 8.2% | 26.7% | 6.9% | 27.3% |

The same two terms have their test output below for comparison with the previous five time period results:

![img](img/prediction_emerging_test_10steps.png)

The RMSE results show that the multiple model stateful LSTM now improves - giving better results than the single model, reflecting the accumulation of error in the single output model LSTM. The multiple outputs single model LSTM is now much worse, indicating that the model had not learnt the complex shape of the data. Finally, the naive results are now worse than ARIMA and the two LSTM models; only Holt-Winters is worse than the naive approach. This indicates that the short term random variation will not move significantly far away from the last known value, but over time it will drift and cause the naive approach to degrade as an estimate.

> In summary and for our USPTO patent dataset, the naive predictor is suitable for short-term forecasts, whereas ARIMA, Holt-Winters and stateful single model, single output LSTM are better suited to longer term forecasts. The multiple model, single output LSTM produced improved results with longer forecast periods, but runs significantly slower (for _N_ time periods, this requires _N_ models and hence trains _N_ times slower than the single model, single output LSTM).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summary and for our USPTO patent dataset, the naive predictor is suitable for short-term forecasts, whereas ARIMA, Holt-Winters and stateful single model, single output LSTM are better suited to longer term forecasts. The multiple model, single output LSTM produced improved results with longer forecast periods, but runs significantly slower (for _n_ time periods, this requires _n_ models and hence trains _n_ times slower than the single model, single output LSTM).
```

It seems that the naive model performs well for short predictions due to the 'white noise' that our dataset demonstrates. Repeating the same value for the short term prediction has a good chance to get the lowest error on a noisy series. In the long term, where the timeseries may have drifted away from the last historical point, the naive has less chance of successful predictions and a good algorithm should perform better.
It will be interesting to repeat these experiments on the smoothed timeseries that we can get using the state-space model with the kalman filter. This should demonstrate less bias compared to the predictions made with the noisy series and make the naive model less strong a predictor compared to the others.

## Usage Examples
This section  demostrates example usage and outputs from the pyGrams pipeline  run on the example USPTO dataset of 3.2M patents. Emergence scoring performed using Porter and predictions generated from naive, ARIMA, Holt-Winters and stateful single LSTM with single look-ahead:

> ```python pygrams.py -it USPTO-mdf-0.05 -emt -pns 1 5 6 9```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python pygrams.py -it USPTO-mdf-0.05 -ts -pns 1 5 6 9```
```

The results show that very few of the terms are predicted to be emergent or decline in the future, which reflects the success of the naive predictor in testing. Those terms flagged a non-stationary are of interest; such as "liquid crystal display" flagged as declining, which given the move towards OLED and related technologies would appear to be a reasonable prediction. This shows, however, that a user needs domain knowledge to confirm the forecasts; the forecasts are dealing with large amounts of noise and hence can only give approximate guidance.

As a comparison, we also ran the same experiment but using term filtering against 'physics':

> ```python pygrams.py -it USPTO-mdf-0.05 -emt -pns 1 5 6 9 -st physics```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python pygrams.py -it USPTO-mdf-0.05 -ts -pns 1 5 6 9 -st physics```
```

Top emergent terms:

    computing device: 40.022921674924206
    pharmaceutical composition: 29.937440463464487
    information associate: 9.449455399162229
    radio access technology: 6.712564447400591

![img](img/prediction_emergent_physics.png)

Top stationary terms:

    mechanical connection: 0.010227567459690001
    laser radiation: 0.0034510619228323436
    logic unit: -0.0028314722774545054
    pharmaceutical formulation: -0.003476640251601243

![img](img/prediction_stationary_physics.png)

Top declining terms:

    logic circuit: -3.7455083518431405
    programmable logic device: -4.228998619987032
    plasma display: -4.235591159894808
    plasma display panel: -14.599067980826895

![img](img/prediction_declining_physics.png)

The prediction results are as expected - emerging results are predicted to continue to grow, stationary aren't predicted to grow and declining are predicted to decline (or remain at zero usage). Interestingly the use of "logic circuit" is flagged as declining, but isn't obviously showing a dramatic decline such as shown by "programmable logic device"; however, both ARIMA and the LSTM predict decline.

## Outputs

> All the outputs we have seen so far came from running different commands in pyGrams. The emerging and popular terminology is listed with scores in two different text files. Also all the timeseries data are saved as a .csv file available for the user to visualize or further process at will. The timeseries along with the requested predictions (if any), are also available in html format to display in browser, one for each outcome: emerging, stationary and declining terms. All these outputs can be found in the /outputs folder. Further to these outputs pygrams can generate wordclouds and term graphs invisual and textual format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the outputs we have seen so far came from running different commands in pyGrams. The emerging and popular terminology is listed with scores in two different text files. Also all the timeseries data are saved as a .csv file available for the user to visualize or further process at will. The timeseries along with the requested predictions (if any), are also available in html format to display in a web browser, one for each outcome: emerging, stationary and declining terms. All of these outputs can be found in the /outputs folder. Further to these outputs, pyGrams can generate wordclouds and term graphs in visual and textual format as described below.
```

3. light source: 2861.64  -> light guide plate: 0.33, light beam: 0.32, light emit: 0.23, light guide: 0.20, emit light: 0.17, light source unit: 0.13, optical element: 0.12, optical system: 0.12, lighting device: 0.11, liquid crystal display: 0.11
4. semiconductor substrate: 2602.68  -> semiconductor device: 0.59, gate electrode: 0.32, dielectric layer: 0.23, insulating film: 0.21, active region: 0.21, conductivity type: 0.19, semiconductor layer: 0.18, drain region: 0.15, insulating layer: 0.14, channel region: 0.14
...

This is output can act as a summary and also as context. It is important to see how popular or emerging terminology is mostly used in the documents.

### Word clouds
pyGrams can also generate the ever so popular wordclouds. As it stands at the moment we only do this for popular terminology, but can easily extend to emerging terms if there is demand for it. An example visualisation of the USPTO dataset can be generated with ```python pygrams.py  -it USPTO-mdf-0.05 -o=wordcloud```, an example output is shown below.

![img](img/wordcloud.png)

## C-ChartoGram

> This is a map that displays where and when different technologies have been invented. Most terminology coming out of the patent documents is associated with a particular technology that was invented at some place at a particular time point. The [Patents C-Chartogram](https://pygrams-patloc.s3.eu-west-2.amazonaws.com/index.html) ( sort for ChronoChartoGram ) has been designed with the js cross-filter library, which allows for fast filtering between the time-place-technologies dimensions. For technical details on its technical design please [read-this-blog] (#c-chart-blog).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a map that displays where and when different technologies have been invented. Most terminology coming out of the patent documents is associated with a particular technology that was invented at some place at a particular time point. The [Patents C-Chartogram](https://pygrams-patloc.s3.eu-west-2.amazonaws.com/index.html) (short for ChronoChartoGram) has been designed with the js cross-filter library, which allows for fast filtering between the time-place-technologies dimensions. For technical details on its technical design please [read-this-blog] (#c-chart-blog).
```

> This is a map that displays where and when different technologies have been invented. Most terminology coming out of the patent documents is associated with a particular technology that was invented at some place at a particular time point. The [Patents C-Chartogram](https://pygrams-patloc.s3.eu-west-2.amazonaws.com/index.html) ( sort for ChronoChartoGram ) has been designed with the js cross-filter library, which allows for fast filtering between the time-place-technologies dimensions. For technical details on its technical design please [read-this-blog] (#c-chart-blog).

Reviewer: Need a reference to the blog - pending I guess at the moment, but it is in the docs folder...

> ## Ongoing and Future work

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Ongoing and future work
```

> The methods and results so far refer to completed an reproducable work available through [pyGrams](https://github.com/datasciencecampus/pyGrams) github repository. There is a backlog of ideas and methods that we are currently evaluating and include in the tool on future versions. Most of them in the area of timeseries interpretation and emergence scoring. The present section lists the most notable ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The methods and results presented refer to completed and reproducible work available through [pyGrams](https://github.com/datasciencecampus/pyGrams) GitHub repository. There is a backlog of ideas and methods that we are currently evaluating and we aim to include in the tool in future versions. This section presents the most notable ideas.
```

### State space models

> State space models with a Kalman filter have proved to be a very flexible approach in timeseries analysis. We decided to experiment with this method for our patents dataset and we immidiately seen some potential in the sense that we could analyze a smoothed version of the timeseries whose derivative gives us the growth rate. This growth rate we believe would be more accurate from second degree polynomial fittings that we tried in the past as it will not suffer from poorly fit curves anymore.Using this method, we can either look for an emergence score between two user defined points or look at the longest uphill curve section or the steepest section using simple calculus equations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
State space models with a Kalman filter have proved to be a very flexible approach in timeseries analysis. We decided to experiment with this method for our patents dataset and we immediately saw potential in the method as we could analyse a smoothed version of the timeseries whose derivative gives us the growth rate. This growth rate we believe would be more accurate from second degree polynomial fittings that we tried in the past as it will not suffer from poorly fitted curve. Using this method, we can either look for an emergence score between two user defined points or look at the longest uphill curve section or the steepest section using simple calculus equations.
```

![img](img/plot_1_internal_combustion_engine.png) ![img](img/plot_4_internal_combustion_engine.png)

> We have been experimenting with different emergence scoring formulas and we concluded into using the growth rate to assess emergence [emergence_index_paper_link_here]. The disadvantage of this method over the previous two (Porter and quadratic or sigmoid fit) is the fact that it is slower as the Kalman filter needs parameter optimisation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have been experimenting with different emergence scoring formulas and we concluded that using the growth rate to assess emergence [emergence_index_paper_link_here] was most effective. The disadvantage of this method over the previous two (Porter and quadratic or sigmoid fit) is the fact that it is slower as the Kalman filter needs parameter optimisation.
```

> We have been experimenting with different emergence scoring formulas and we concluded into using the growth rate to assess emergence [emergence_index_paper_link_here]. The disadvantage of this method over the previous two (Porter and quadratic or sigmoid fit) is the fact that it is slower as the Kalman filter needs parameter optimisation.

Reviewer: Need link to emergence paper

### b-splines

> This was a lower priority proposal for us and we decided to partner with the data-science department of Cardiff University to investigate initially as a master's thesis. We endeavour to compare results between b-splines and the state-space model once ready in terms of execution performance and accuracy. Potentially we hope to be able to integrate into pyGrams pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This was a lower priority proposal for us and we decided to partner with the data-science department of Cardiff University to investigate initially as a master's thesis. We endeavour to compare results between b-splines and the state-space model once ready in terms of execution performance and accuracy. Potentially we hope to be able to integrate into the pyGrams pipeline.
```

> ### Dynamic Time Warping

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Dynamic time warping
```

> This is another project proposal currently implemented in partnership with Cardiff University. We aim to be able to cluster 100s of thousands of timeseries resulting from our datasets processed through our pipeline. If successful, this can contribute in a number of ways towards our outputs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is another project proposal currently being investigated in partnership with Cardiff University. We aim to be able to cluster 100s of thousands of timeseries resulting from our datasets processed through our pipeline. If successful, this can contribute in a number of ways towards our outputs:
```

- investigate relationships between keywords in similar groups. Is one technology enabling another?
- analyze clusters in isolation for faster or more focused processing. For example analyze and forecast emergence for terms showing a sigmoid timeseries pattern.

## Conclusions

> This report demonstrates methodology and results from pyGrams, an open source text processing pipeline that we developed in DSC that outputs timeseries trends from large document collections. Our results in this report were random information retrieval queries to demonstrate how the tool works. Evaluation of the tool will be done in due course form the IPO and possibly from other research groups in ONS analyzing research publications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This report demonstrates methodology and results from pyGrams, an open source text processing pipeline that we developed in DSC that outputs timeseries trends from large document collections. Our results in this report were random information retrieval queries to demonstrate how the tool works. Evaluation of the tool will be completed in due course by the IPO and possibly from other research groups in ONS analysing research publications.
```
